BHAGAVAD

GUNA DARPANA   
\-

Commentary by Parasara Bhattarya

on

Vishnu Sahasranama

(1) My salutation to Govinda (Embar) and my father (Srivatsanka). I contemplate on Lakshmaṇārya (Sri Rāmānuja) and meditate on Mahān (Peria Nambi). My mind be full of Yamunarya (Alavandar). I approach respectfully Ramamisra. May 1 see face to face Pundarikaksha Acharya. I adore Nathamuni, the first of our acharyas. My adorations and praises go to Sathari (i.e., Nammazhvar). May Lakshmi grace me with Her vision. No other resource for me. I surrender myself unto Śridhara (ie, the Lord of Lakshmi). (Thus, the *guru\-paramparā*, the line of spiritual preceptors,   
is extolled.)

(Embar and Kürattazhvän are referred to by the dual, Govinda\-tātau, because both are the direct preceptors of Sri Parasara Bhatta and the disciples of Sri Rāmānuja.)

(2) Salutation to Vishvaksena, the commander\-in\-chief of Lord Sri Ranga, and who rules with his followers, such as Gajānana, and who is ever with Sutravati (his wife).

\[In the usual Guruparampara, Vishvaksena comes between Nammazhwar and Lakshmi. Here, Vishvaksena gets   
a whole stanza to himself; his name was omitted in the previous stanza.\]

(3) Salutation to Nārāyaṇa, who incarnated as Krishna Dvaipayana, to whom belong all the Vedas, with the Mahabharata which is the fifth Veda (because it is he that divided and made them available to the world).

(4) Inspired by Rangeśa and given the title of Parasara Bhatta by the Lord of Sriranga Himself, I, the person named

*3*   
BHAGAVAD UNA DARPANA

Ranganatha, the son of the sage, Srivatsänka, who (the said Srivatsanka) ever considered his discipleship under Ramanuja as a great treasure\-I now proceed to comment on the (holy) Names of Lord Hari, with a view to obtain the blessings of the Lord, Ranganatha, and His Consort, Sri Lakshmi.

(5) In samsara (the world of recurring births and deaths) generally, there is great ignorance about the Lord; more so in the Kaliyuga (the age of darkness and sin). And it is out of foolhardiness that I venture to speak to men who deem themselves perfect, of the secret of the *Vedanta*. May Vyasa who composed this hymn of praise, and the Merciful Lord Hari who is the object of praise therein\-may they both bear with me for this folly.

(6) I prostrate and pray (to you, kind readers): please place faith in Lord Hari and the collection of His Names, and feel kindly towards me who attempt to explain the Names, and drink this nectar. Let there be no indifference or enmity in the matter.

\[After the above preliminary and benedictory verses

Parasara Bhaṭṭa proceeds with his preface to his Com mentary.\]

We see in the world that any intelligent person, after having gained some knowledge of the objects of human pursuit through the sources of knowledge (such as perception, infer- ence etc.), desires to enjoy the good things of life like flowers, sandal, gold, etc., to eschew things like knife, thorns, etc., which are unpleasant, and is indifferent to neutral things like a log of wood or stone or mud. Of these, the two purushārthas (objects desired by men) known as artha and kama (wealth and pleasures) are experienced by means of actual direct perception and inference. They are to be given up, because they are associated with innumerable imperfections like the follow. ing. They (1) are petty, (2) lead to harmful consequences, (3) are disgusting, (4) are evanescent, (5) are mixed with distress- ful things, and (6) are not even easily obtainable. On the other hand, (the other two primary objects of human pursuit) dharma (victue) and paratattva (salvation) can be learnt only from the scriptures. They are opposed to the other two

4   
INTRODUCTION

purushärthas (i.e., artha and kama) and are. full of beneficent qualities. Therefore, the sãstras (scriptures and works of religious authority) and their teachings are to be preferred. As is proclaimed with one voice by those learned in the Itihasas (epic history) and the *Purāṇas*: "Truth, this is the Truth and again the Truth. This is proclaimed with hands uplifted that there is no sastra (authority) higher than the *Vedas*, no God higher than Kesava."

As regards the Vedas, the highest of the 14 subjects of study (vidya\-sthānas), they are to be understood in their fullest. extent and scope through the Itihasas and Purānas. It is also said that the *Veda* trembles with fear at ignorant or half learned persons, thinking, 'They will betray me (by misinter pretation). Hence, it is clear that the understanding or interpretation of the Vedas can be done only through the study of the Itihasas and Puranas; and of these, since the Puranas are mentioned only after Itihasas, the Itilasas are the more important.

\[This reasoning is according to rules of grammar. In a copulative (dvandva) compound, the word with less number of vowels must be mentioned first, except in the case where the thing denoted by the word with the larger number of vowels is the more to be respected.\]

Hence, the Mahabharata*,* like the *Rāmāyaṇa*, is the proper refuge to us (properly to understand the Vedas).

\[Then the commentator takes up each one of the topics   
given above for further elucidation.\]

The chapter of The Thousand Names (1) is the essence of respected Mahābhārata, (2) has been sung by the great sages, (3) has been strung together by the great preceptor of the *Vedas*, (4) was expounded by Bhishma as his excellent creed of faith, (5) has been accepted by all persons with respect as excellent, and (6) contains truths and lessons in conformity with the teachings of the Gita, and other such authoritative works. Because of all these, this chapter is to be 'taken up (for study, recitation and meditation).

LO   
5   
.BHAGAVAD GUNA DARPANA

(1) Essence of the Mahabharata:\-The Mahābhārata is considered by great men as a great authority, and more so, because it is an Itihasa with clearly worded and well constructed sentences and phrases. Both in the Vayu Purāna and the Śaiva *Purāņa,* it is said of this great Itihasa; "The venerable Vyasa churned *the* ocean of the Vedas, using his intelligence as the churning stick and produced for the good of the world this moon called the Mahabharata". In the Bhavishyat Purāņa, it is said: "Man is afraid of the *astras* like a diseased man of a bitter diug. Hence it is that the essence of all the *sastras* has been used to bring forth this Mahabharata as a delightful poem'. Again, the Matsya Purāna says:\-"God Vishnu Him- self was born as the son of Parasara called Krishna Dvaipayana. by whom for the sake of lighting the world the moon named the Mahabharata was produced." Says the Vishnu Purāṇa: "Know then that Vyasa, called Dvaipayana, is no other than Lord Narayana Himself. Who else could have produced this great work, the Mahabharata?" So also does the *Markandeya Purana* say: "This world has been sanctified and has been made free of impurities by the floods of the (holy) words of Vyasa, descending from the high mountain of the Vedas, and cutting by the very roots the trees of false and perverted dharma In the Mahabharata itself it is mentioned that a Brahmin who is not versed in this *Itihasa,* but only in the four Vedas, *Vedāngas* and Upanishads is not a learned Brahmin. Thus, this Mahābhārata is extolled by thousands of sayings.

This work follows and is consistent with the Vedus, the books of sacred law, the Itihāsa and Puranas with all their subsidiary parts or auxiliaries. Indeed, it is said: "Only what is found here is to be found elsewhere; whatever is not found here cannot be found elsewhere." Thus, whatever is performed or is to be performed for salvation, according to the Vedas, etc., and whatever is to be performed by way of worldly conduct are dealt with here and laid down in no uncer- tain terms and without bias or partiality. For all these reasons, very many wise men have concluded that the Maha- bhārata is more precious than any other Purana. This chapter of the Thousand Names occurs in the Anusasanika Parvan. which is the heart of the Itihasa, and in the context of

6

INTRODUCTION

expounding the duty of charity, for the purpose of laying down. the essence of the sastras in a short and abbreviated form.

As this work teaches us the highest goal, and as the doubts about its authoritativeness and its being intended as a mere matter of praise are dispelled (lit. thrown far out) by the excellence of the reasons to prove that it is authoritative, and by the possession of the characteristics that this work deals with the Ultimate Reality, this work is eminently fit to be taken up by persons desirous of worldly prosperity or moksha.

(2) So also-" sung by rishis ". Great sages like Saunaka, Sanatkumara, Narada, etc., have sung, reciting the names with their full meaning and import.

(3) "Collated together by the Vedacharya". The exposi tion of the above is as follows:\-The venerable teacher of the Vedas, Krishna Dvaipayana, is the most reliable (of teachers). For, He is an incarnation of the Supreme Lord, Nārāyaṇa, endowed with unsurpassed knowledge and other auspicious. qualities, such as aiśvarya, and not subject to any imperfec- tions like confusion of mind or tendency to mislead others, or indifference. And he, being inspired solely with the desire to benefit the men of Kaliyuga, who are generally of dull minds, divided and arranged the Vedas. He composed the Maha. bharata, called the fifth Veda, with the object of dispelling the ignorance, doubts or perverse misconceptions of the people about the Real Truth and the principles of good conduct enshrined in the Vedas.

Look at the nobility of his ancestry. He is the great- grandson of Vasishta who, by a word of his, ennobled Viśvāmitra, a Kshatriya, into a Brahmin; is the son of Parasara who is extolled by the Linga Purana as a great soul who had attained, by the grace of Vasishța and Pulastya, the true vision of the Reality and who attained eminence as the author of a purana (the Vishnu Purana). He is respected by assemblage of the rishis as one who has performed penances. and yoga of unsurpassed austerity. Thus by him the Names of Vishnu, which were sung by various sages, had been strung together in the form of a hymn of praise. Hence, this Chapter of Thousand Names has to be accepted as the most beneficial (to mankind).

7   
BHAGAVAD GUNA DARPANA

(4) Besides, Bhishma (who taught this) is recognised as a most trustworthy person. Veda Vyasa exhorted Dharmaraja to go to Bhishma for instruction in these words:" O mighty King\! If you want to be instructed in all dharmas, go to old Bhishma, the grandsire of the Kauravas. He is all wise; and knows the essential Truth of Things\-the noble son of Gangä will resolve all doubts troubling your mind in respect of all subtle and mystic matters. He has seen face to face all the gods including their chief, Indra." Again, "In all assemblies where Bhishma was present, there were always to be found present holy rishis. There is nothing *that* has to be known. which is not known to him. He, the great knower of dharmas and all subtle, mystic, spiritual truths, will instruct you in all dharmas ".

Not only this. Even the Supreme Lord, Śri Krishna Himself (exhorted Dharmaraja to resort to Bhishma and) said: "Bhishma is on the bed of arrows like a fire slowly cooling. He is contemplating on Me. My mind goes to him. He knows all divine weapons. He has in his mind all the four Vedas and the *Vedāngas*. I am now one with him by My will. O King of Bharatas\! he knows the past, the present and the future. My mind is with him. If this head of the family of Kurus ends his days, there will be the danger of knowledge declining and perishing. Hence it is that I urge you to go to him".

Further (He, the Lord, Śri Krishna, said to Bhishma) also: "O best of Bharatas, what you are going to say to Dharmaraja will be ever established in this world as per- manently as the words of the Veda. The past, the present and the future are clear to you, old in wisdom, as (the fruit) in the palm of the hand. I have known you. You have indeed the capacity to create by your penance the world of movables and immovables .....No decay for you nor ignorance nor delusion... Your mind will always be clear and calm like the moon cleared of clouds, ever rest in *sattvaguna*, and not be affected by rajas or tamas."

\[Sattva, *rajas* and tamas are the three qualities'   
stituents of matter. They are believed to affect the mind also, sattva making it clear, rajas inducing

8   
INTRODUCTION

passion and tamas bringing about dullness, perversity and sloth.\]

The venerable Narada also (said): "He knows fully well all the dharmas of the four varņas (castes). Hence tell him all your doubts (and get them resolved)". Narada also praised Bhishma as one of great eminence who had attained the vision of God on account of his association with and service to great rishis and elders, and also by his life\-long and uninterrupted observance of celibacy, penance and contemplation. He also blessed Bhishma and directed him to expound to the listeners not only the Ultimate Truth but also the dharmas and rules of conduct. Moreover, Bhishma has already received the blessings of his father and mother by his services to them.

Bhishma (thus exhorted also) said these words about his knowledge of the Supreme Truth: "O Govinda\! By Thy grace and Thy blessings, the heat of the body, doubts, weari- ness, languor, exhaustion. disease, have all vanished from me. I see like a fruit in the palm of my hand the past, the present and the future. O\! Achyuta, by Thy gracious gift there are present in my mind, all the dharmas mentioned *in* the Vedas and laid down in the Vedingas. By Thy grace again, O Janardana, and by constant contemplation on Thee, I feel strong like a young man and am enabled to expound the dharmas". Such a Bhishma introduced the subject of the Thousand Names in these words, "I consider this dharma as the best of the dharmas", and expressed his view that the chanting of the Thousand Names was his highest mata or creed of faith.

(5) Accepted by all\-The Thousand Names have been accepted by all in the world. In the Sabha Parvan, the Lord is praised as adorned with Thousand Names: "The Lord is one with a Thousand Names." In the Vishnu Purāṇa, in the context of the grant of salvation to Gajendra, the chief among elephants, Vishnu is praised as one with a Thousand Names, etc. Again, in this chapter, in the introduction and at the end where the gains (phala) of the recitation are set out, the excellence of the Thousand Names is mentioned.

So also, in Ayurveda (the Science of Longevity or Medicine) and in other sastras which deal with worldly benefits and

9 BHAGAVAD GUNA DARPANA

spiritual welfare. The Charaka Samhita says: "By praising (with these Thousand Names) Vishnu of Thousand Names, the Lord of movables and immovables, a man is relieved of all fevers." Even a modern work ie, a collection of miscellane ous matters, in the context of dealing with the remedy for urinary troubles (meha), starts with "Let the Purushasukta be recited" and goes on to say that the Sahasranama of Bhārata should also be recited. In respect of consumption cases also, the Thousand Names are to be recited as expiation. In cases of certain fevers, it is said that, after *homa*, the Thousand Names are to be recited. For getting rid of the bad influences of planets, the Thousand Names are said to be classed with the Marutsuktam." So also in other places.

Even ordinary poets and writers describe this hymn as a protective force. In the Kadambari, Bhaṭṭa Bäna, when he describes a room used for confinement of women at childbirth, mentions it as a place where the recitation of Nārāyaṇa's Thousand Names is going on without ceasing. Also in this world, it is seen that the Thousand Names are accepted with faith, because many persons learn, memorise, hear, recite, sing, write, comment on and show respect to those versed in the Thousand Names for the purpose of getting rid of inauspicious and grievous troubles caused by poison, ghosts, diseases, planetary influence, bad dreams and omens. (The Thousand Names are also used) for expiating grievous sins, gaining prosperity both here and hereafter, loosening the knot of the bondage of samsara and attaining Paramapada, the supreme abode of Vishnu. Some use them for the mere enjoyment derived through the recitation of the names, from tasting the nectar of His beneficent and auspicious qualities.

So too this hymn acts as the only effective medicine for children, mutes, foolhardy persons, women and atheists. Even the Vedas are not accepted as readily by all persons as this hymn, for fools and such others will not accept the *Vedas*. Besides, this hymn is open to all, but not the Vedas, as they are divided into many divisions, each to be resorted to by particular families, clans or septs. Hence it can be said that the Thousand Names have the excellence of being accepted by all.

*10*

INTRODUCTION

(6) Because of its conformity with the Gita, etc.: This hymn is in conformity with and establishes the conclusive teachings of the Mahabharata as established in its various portions. such as the Bhagavadgitā, Nārāyaṇiya, Yanasandhi, Agrapuja*,* Uttamadharmānuśāsana, etc.

For these six reasons, this has been determined as the most fit and useful for all who generally act after full delib- eration and after full satisfaction. All *the* various teachers of knowledge and of the sustras, (such as the deva\-rishis and brahma\-rishis like Devasravas, Devasthana, Narada, Vätsya, Asman, Sumantu etc., who have striven for' and obtained the vision of God, have approved with delight this divine hymn. Also by Śri Krishna the Lotus\-eyed, the Lord of All, the great Teacher of the Gita, the Guru of our forefathers, this hymn has been listened to with rapture, sitting along with others around Bhishma.

In respect of such a great work we now attempt a commentary for eludicating the true knowledge of the beneficent qualities of the Lord.

Vaisampayana narrated this chapter as another great secret without being asked and of his own accord and out of his great friendliness to Janamejaya, who, perhaps, observed silence and refrained from further questioning because he had felt satisfied that he had understood all about the truths from what had been told him already often in various chapters about the Supreme Reality.

श्री वैशम्पायन उवाच

श्रुत्वा धर्मान् अशेषेण पावनानि च सर्वशः । gfufge: araad gatarszerza || 8 ||

Sri Vaisampayana said:

"(1) Having heard all the dharmas in their entirety (without anything being left out) and all other purifi- catory acts, Yudhishthira addressed again Santanu's son (Bhishma) as follows:

Here 'dharmas' means all those acts which are many and of the form of *Raja*\-dharma (the duties of kings), Moksha. dharma (the way to salvation) and Dana\-dharma (the duty

*11*

B\-2   
BHAGAVAD GUNA DARPANA

of charity), which are prescribed to be performed by injunc tions contained in Sruti, Singiti, etc., as leading to worldly and heavenly benefits as well as to eternal salvation.

In entirety\-completely to the extent to which it extends. Purificatory acts\-such as penance, pilgrimage to holy

places.

All everything connected with them\-i.e., the benefits to be derived by performing them, their divisions and their characteristics and those who have the authority to perform them.

Yudhishthira\-himself the son of the god of dharma. The son of Santanu Bhishma is the son of Santanu by Ganga and is thus of illustrious birth.   
\--

Addressed again\-The question is put to learn what exactly is considered by Bhishma as the most beneficial. In fact, this is known from the nature of the question put later on, What is the dharma which is considered by you to be the best of all dharmas?" His interest was sincere to follow the course of conduct of great men. For good men seek to know the stand taken by the preceptors and take delight in what is considered by them as the truth and as beneficial conduct. They do not do any action merely because it is laid down by some authority. (Sanction by an authoritative sastra is not enough; it must be agreed to and followed by great and good men).

We have already mentioned:\-"An intelligent person. should first examine the pramana (authoritative source of knowledge) and should take up such objects of knowledge as are for his benefit." They are of two kinds\-upaya, the means, and upeya, the object cr fruit derived. Of such fruits, there are three kinds: (1) what is liked, (2) more liked and (3) most liked. Similarly, in respect of means also, there are three kinds the good, the better and the best.

In respect of the fruits (of actions), they are subject to the following infirmities\-birth, growth, change and end, etc.; and (if the fruit is sentient) they are further subject to the charac taristics of sentient beings like pain, ignorance, attachment,

*12*   
INTRODUCTION

dislike, karma (sins), the fruits of karma, and impressed tenden- cies on account of previous practice. Their merits are:\- freedom from imperfections, being pleasing (to mind and body), permanence, infiniteness and (when the upeya is chetana), true knowledge, bliss, lordship and wealth, etc.

In respect of the means, it is subject to imperfections, such as heavy expenses, bodily exertion, uncertainty of obtain- ing the fruit (vyabhicharitva), pettiness of the resulting fruit, etc. Its merits are certainty in achieving fruit, freedom from decay, ease to perform, greatness of the benefit derived,

etc.

A person must examine the upaya and upeya with their relative merits and demerits as stated above. What is excellent and best must be selected, and the others must be dropped, just as he had already refused (thrown away) some of the worst things at the original examination of the astras. Hence, it is necessary to desire to know the best of upaya and upeya, distinguishing them from what is bad or low in com. parison. Thereupon Yudhishthira asked of Bhishma only these two (the best of upayas and the best of upeyas), dividing the subject into six questions in two stanzas, led by the desire to investigate the subject.

Since the means (upaya) are required only for the purpose of gaining the end (upeya) and the end is therefore more important, the question in the first instance is about the *upeya.* Such *upeya* is dealt with by the sastras in two ways: one as the supreme tattva (Truth) and the other as the supreme goal to be reached. The question therefore covers both the aspects. First, Yudhishthira asks about the Supreme Reality.

gfafyr cara

किमेकं दैवतं लोके किं वाप्येकं परायणम् ।

egara: di nudra: grggafaar: gug || 2   
||

को धर्मः सर्वधर्माणां भवतः परमो मतः ।

किं जपन मुच्यते जन्तुर्जन्मसंसारबन्धनात् ॥ ३ ॥

*13*

BHAGAVAD GUNA DARPANA

Yudhishthira said:\-

(2) Who is the One (Supreme) Deity according to the *śāstras* ? What is the one Supreme Goal? Praising and worshipping Whom may men attain the good? (3) What dharma is considered by you as the best of dharmas? By reciting which mantra is a man released from bonds of birth and *samsara*?

According to the '*sastras*':\-This phrase is to be taken along with each one of the questions.

Considered by you as the best : This phrase (in the third stanza) is to be taken to link up with the previous stanza also, just as a lion walks along, looking also behind. That is, this must be taken to qualify each one of the questions, of course, making the necessary changes in the case\-inflections (of the nouns).

Sastras:\-The word in the original, loka, means the thing by which we see, ie., the body of *sastras*, consisting of śruti, smiti, etc. (because only the sastras can teach us about the gods).

The One (Ekam):\-That which has none superior to or equal to itself. This is inferable from the later passages, "Of Him who is the greatest in the world" and "He who is the great, supreme splendour ", which answer the question. This word is used here not to denote an individual or its number, because this is always inferable from the form of the word daivatam, which consits of the nominal stem (*prāti* padika) and the suffix indicating the singular. Therefore, the word One would become of useless significance. Besides, if there is any deity not indicated as one and not possessing an individuality, the word One may perhaps be used. Since there is no such deity who is without individuality or is manifold, One must have its distinctive meaning as stated above. Moreover, it cannot be the attribute of any (deity), as in the answer to the question, there is nothing referring to One as number.

*Deity* (daivatam):\-that which possesses qualities like brightness, etc., peculiar to the Rulership of the Universe. The question, therefore, is: "Which is that Deity, which you

*14*   
INTRODUCTION

consider as the Deity spoken of as the best in the śāstras teaching the ultimate truths?" Doubts arise on account of differences even in the minds of persons who believe that one Supreme God (i.e., one possessing all the qualities required for the Rulership of the Universe) is taught in the various *sustras* and philosophies. These doubts are as to whether such qualities of Supreme Lordship as unlimited knowledge and powers arise with reference to a particular modification of the unreal, evolving under the limiting adjunct of māyā, or whether rulership over all is natural (to any deity). Specifi- cally also the question arises as to whether Hari (Vishnu) or Hara (Śiva) or Hiranyagarbha (Brahma) is the Supreme Deity, because in the sistras.such qualities (of Rulership, etc.) are ascribed to them in discriminately both individually and in common. Hence the question is in the form: "Which is the Supreme Deity?

The second question is:   
"Which is the supreme goal of attainment?" This question is propounded because there are conflicting opinions in sastras dealing with the ultimate benefit as to what is moksha (salvation) and what happens at that stage, such as whether (i) the atman perishes in moksha, or (ii) Nescience covering the atman is dispelled, or (iii) the qualities of the atman perish, leaving the atmin alone to exist *(*Vaiseshika), or (iv) equality with the Paramatman is attained, or (v) there is acquisition of the quality of the Paramātman, or (vi) the status of being a shadow of the Paramatman is attained, or (vii) the acquisition is only of the essential nature of bliss, etc., or (viii) a status of continuous service to the Lord is attained.

In the original text, the words used in connection with the goal are "Kim vā api ekam parāyaṇam". Here *va* is a syllable denoting alternatives, and *api* conveys a conjunctive sense. Therefore, it is to be understood from this that the questioner wants to know whether the Deity to be determined as the Supreme One is alternative to the goal to be reached or whether such Deity is itself the goal to be attained. Or again, it may be said that the questioner wants to know whether the benefit (moksha) to be enjoyed is the same for all or different in each particular case.

*15*

BHAGAVAD GUNA DARPANA

Goal (Param Ayanam): all beneficent and free from imperfection, hence, the Highest. Therefore, the question is: "What is considered by you as the highest goal desired by a person out of the very many desires relating to this world or the next?" Thus is the twofold question about upeya, the goal.

Then about the upaya. The question about the upaya (means) arises because there are disputes as to whether karma yoga, jñāna yoga or bhakti yoga are alternative means to adopt or are to be ad pted together or whether one or other among them is to be treated as the principal and the rest as subsidiaries. Again, the means are divided into three kinds : siddha, sadhya and *sulambana.*

The siddha upaya is one that is already existing, such as God, who, being worshipped, grants favours. This Deity may be worshipped in two ways\-laghu (easy) or alaghu (difficult). Therefore the question is put in the said two ways by this half stanza: Praising or worshipping Whom, men may attain the good? The question is about the deity worshipped, i.e., praised and worshipped'. Praising: reciting in praise. the several auspicious qualities of the Deity. Worshipping :\- carrying out supreme worship by means of bhakti (devotion) in the form of meditation.

Men \-any human being merely (without reference to caste, creed, etc.).

The good*:*\-This is of two kinds, relating to prosperity in this world or bliss in the next. (All this relates to the siddhop@ya).

Next, the sadiyopaya, i e., the means to be adopted with the help of speech, mind and body for gaining the grace of the Deity, such as repeating prayers, meditation, worship with offerings of flowers, etc. Which of them is the best? This is the question propounded in the phrase, "Ko dharmaḥ", etc.

*Best*\-with no equal or a superior. Considered (Matal*)*: concluded by you after full examination as the ultimate refuge, like wealth set apart for use in dangerous emergencies (a\-*pat*\-*dhana)*.

16   
INTRODUCTION

Next, as to sālambana upaya, the means depending on aids such as the things or articles used for worship like mantras to be repeated, flowers, incense (as also auspicious objects of meditation like the idol or the figure of God). Of these, the question relates to the oral basis of japa (the mantra to be recited) by the words, kim japam Japa is repetitive recitation of a mantra, accompanied by prescribed rites, etc.   
etc. Manu (II. 87) says: "A Brahmin can attain anything only by japa. There is no doubt about it. Whether he does anything else or not does not matter.   
For a person doing japa is friendly to all (but a person performing a sacrifice has to do cruel acts, such, as killing a goat, horse, etc.). Hence, he is the real Brahmin". Again, he says (II. 85): "Japa*\-yajna* is ten times more effective than dravya\-*yajña*, (sacrifice by spending money)". In the Gita (X. 25) also, Śri Krishna says: "Of all yajñas I am the japa\-yajña". Thus, among the actions of three kinds done by the mind, speech and body, japa is more acceptable than the others, and the question here is only about the japa which is to be done by word of mouth\-not about others which are to be performed either by the mind or by the body.

Man *(*jantu): any one who has the characteristic of being. born. (Man is born only for the worship of the Lord).

Bonds of birth and samsara:\-By birth is denoted all *the* sufferings of old age, death. the womb and hell etc. Samsara denotes Ignorance, the impressed tendencies from the sins or merits of one's actions, inclinations, desires and the contact wich prakriti (matter): all these form the reasons or causes for the bondage (in the form of birth). Bonds (bandhana) :\- These are obstructions to the attainment of salvation.

Released (Muchyate): Here the reference is only to moksha, the ultimate release; but from the trend of answers given, that the japa is the *sadhana* for all   
for all kinds of benefits, it must be taken that the question relates to all kinds of phalas (benefits). From the use of the words, loke (scripture), aseshena (in entirety), sarvasah (in full), and mānavāḥ (persons), it is clear that Yudhishthira has heard all things relating to dharmas, such as the seasons for perform- ance, the competency of the performer, the divisions and subsidiaries of actions and the benefits. So also, he wants

*17*   
BHAGAVAD GUNA DARPANA

all such information'in respect of the dharma considered best by Bhishma.

These six questions are answered by Bhishma not in their order, but sometimes in inverse order and sometimes in direct order. Considering that upaya (the means) is the more important, as it is the basis for the upeya (the goal), and as the question relating to the upaya is the last, Bhishma starts his reply with dealing with the means and the objects relating to japa.

Bhishma said :\-

भीष्म उवाच

जगत्प्रभुं देवदेवमनन्तं पुरुषोत्तमम् । स्तुवन्नामसहस्रेण पुरुषः सततोत्थितः ॥ ४ ॥

(4) A person who is ever and always engaged in praising with the (hymn, of) Thousand Names the Lord of this universe, the God of gods and the Highest Person, with no limitation (as to time, place, etc.) \-

*The* Lord of the universe:\- the Lord of the movables and immovables in the world.

The God of gods *:*\-Just as the gods occupy a high position in comparison with ordinary human beings who serve them, so also the Lord is above the gods in His glory, because the gods do Him service.

way.   
Limitless\-whose glory is not curtailed or limited in any

The Highest Person:\- whose gracious generosity is supreme. With the hymn of Thousand Names:\-making it the oral basis of japa (recitative praise).

Praising denotes that the praising is the cause (for freedom from grief).

Ever engaged :\-Continuous praises of and thoughts of the Lord are very pleasing and beneficial to the devotee; any break in such continuity causes him great pain. Thus in the Taittiriya Upanishad (I. 7): "When for security (from fear of

*18*   
INTRODUCTION

samsāra) a devotee stands firm in the Lord, who is unseeable. bodiless, indescribable and needing no support, he obtains that security. But one who breaks away from the Lord (in his meditation) suffers from fears of samsara." This is explained in the Smriti also thus: "The fact that Vasudeva is absent in the mind (contemplation) of a person even for a muhurta or a minute is a big loss, gives wide room (for bad things), results in perverse thoughts and wicked actions". Also: "Sitting in a cage made of the flames of fire is preferable to the torment suffered by associating with persons who have turned away from the thoughts of the Lord". Again: "One who has spent even a short time without thoughts of the Lord may as well weep, as if he has been robbed (of wealth) by a thief."

Thus has been described the object of japa, recitative praise. Then follows the subject as to who is to be praised or meditated upon. The fifth stanza furnishes the answer to the question as to who is to be praised or worshipped. It will be noticed that in the inverse sequence (the fifth query) the subject of dharma has to be treated here. But it is not so ; the subject treated is about the person to be praised and the mode of worship (contained in the third and fourth questions). This is because the subject of worship and praise forms part of the supreme dharma and has to be expounded.

तमेव चार्चयन्नित्यं भक्त्या पुरुषमव्ययम् | ध्यायन् स्तुवन्नमस्यंश्च यजमानस्तमेव च ॥ ५ ॥

(5) And (engaged) in worshipping always with only bhakti the said Person, the Eternal, meditating upon Him, glorifying Him, saluting Him by prostrating before. Him and performing sacrifices to Him-

Him only\-The fifth stanza conveys the idea that the person who is the subject of japa is also the subject of worship. In the Mahabhārata (Sabhā Parvan) it is said at the time of ac- cording first honours to Sri Krishna: "We desire to offer our worship to Him who is full (of perfections), the great teacher, the first *guru*, eminently fit to be worshipped. Be pleased, to agree, all here"; "There is no person other than He fit to be worshipped"; "Wise men do not offer worship to Brahma (the four\-faced Creator), Rudra and others mentioned as

*19*

B\-3 BHAGAVAD GUNA DARPANA

deities in the Smritis, because the benefit derived from worshipping them is limited" *(*Bhārata\-XII. 342.36); “The benefits derived from them are perishable" (*Ģītā,* VII. 23).

Person (Purusha):\-the lotus\-eyed (Nārāyaṇa).

Eternal (Avyaya) denotes that, however much His qualities are enjoyed, further and further new qualities appro- priate to Him spring up without end.

Worshipping (Archayan): performing\-bhakti yoga which is of the form of service to Him.

Always (Nityam) denotes a person who cannot exist even for a moment without thoughts of Him like the devotees described in the Gitā (X. 9) "whose minds are concentrated on Me and whose lives are dependent on Me".

How to worship? With bhakti, i.e., with the affectionate consciousness that "He is my Master and I am in His service". How else also? By meditating *(*dhyāyan): —i.e., contemplating always on the virtuous qualities of the Lord with a full mind, so as to have a stream of thought like an unbroken stream of nectar and to put an end to the threefold suffering of samsara (arising out of the body, out of the outside things or by the will of the Lord).

How else again? Praising (Stuvan):—striving to recite by word of mouth the various qualities of the Lord, the body being thrilled with the bliss of enjoyment, the eyes streaming with tears of joy and the voice tremulous on account of such

tears.

How else again? Prostrating (Namasyan):\- Bowing low, i.e., offering at the lotus feet of the Lord, himself, who is impure because of egotism, and with his body and organs and senses, inner and outer, bent low on account of bhakti and the feeling of Not mine", and uttering at the same time the prayer "Take all that is mine as Thine".

How else again? Sacrificing (Yajamāna):\- one who does worship to God, i.e., one who performs with sincere devotion an incomparable, pure and pleasing worship by offering (Him) a series of objects of enjoyment of various kinds suitable to His enjoyment, such as arghya (a respectful oblation of water),

20   
INTRODUCTION

flowers, madhuparka etc., (a mixture of milk, honey, sugar, curds and ghee) respectively called aupachārika (ceremonial), sāms parsika (tactile) and abhyavahārika (edible) \- all gathered with pure bhakti, and in haste by the agitated feeling of frust- ration that he (the devotee) is unable to show full gratitude for the great act of grace shown him by the Lord by making the devotee His own.

It is this bhakti which is identified by the Vedas with the yoga said to be the royal road to salvation. Because, the venerable Badarāyaṇa, after examining the Vedanta texts Ilke "Knowing Him (Brahman) thus"; "The Brahman knower attains the Highest"; "With the help of sacrifices, charity, penance and fasting (the devotee desires to see God)"; and also "A person restraining the inner and outer senses sees the atman in the atman "\-has laid down in his aphorisms. thus:\- Bhakti requires as ingredients all things like sacrifice, etc., as in the case of a horse (which can be used only with a saddle)"; "(Not only karma) but that the devotee must also cultivate restraint of inner and outer senses"; and "He must repeat often and often the practice of contemplation".

Thus, he shows that bhakti is the best means for attaining moksha. For this bhakti is worship and meditation induced and fostered indirectly by the varṇāśrama duties and directly by peace of mind and restraint of senses, which are synony- mous with the ideas expressed in the words, vedana (knowing). dhyāna (meditation), dhruva\-smriti (unceasing remembrance) and vivekaja (born of discrimination). For its climax, it has the direct clear vision (of God), which is attained by the strong impressions on the mind made by pleasant and often repeated thoughts, flowing in a constant stream, uninterfered with by any distractions by outer objects or things. The *Vakyakāra* also says that *vedana* (knowing) is nothing but contemplation, for it is said: "It is this *upāsana* which, when duly perfected, is nothing but bhakti. Why? Because it has the names of (1\) samyoga (union), (2) rupa (form) and (3) chodana (injunc- tion).

(1) Samyoga:\-This name denotes that bhakti, like upāsana, leads to moksha. It is said: "His form does not appear within the range of physical vision, no one has seen Him with the physical eyes. He is perceived by the mind

21   
BHAGAVAD GUNA DARPANA

through bhakti and steadfastness. Those who know Him thus become immortal." (Kath. Up. II. 6\. 9\.) Here "hrit " means bhakti. This is clear by the use in other śruti texts and in Smritis. In fact the Mahabharata, beginning with the words, "His form does not appear within the range of physical vision", goes on to say: "One who has his soul filled by devotion *(*bhakti) and steadfastness (dhriti) gets a vision of the Intelligent Self (ie., the Brahman)", It is to be noted here that the word bhakti is used in the place of hrit*.*

In the Gita also bhakti is said to be the means to attain moksha: That Supreme Person, O Partha, can be attained by bhakti undistracted" (VIII. 22); and "It is not possible by anything except bhakti (to see Me)'' (XI. 54), The Angirasa Smriti says: "By uninterrupted bhakti salvation is obtained". Again, in the Vaishnava Dharma also:\-"Unadulterated bhakti towards the Supreme Soul, Govinda, leads men to *mukti*. Do not feel any doubt about it". From the *Rāmāyaṇa*: "Those who are immensely devoted to Thee, the Ancient One and the Highest Being, obtain all their desires in this and the other world. The devotees never fail in attaining their objectives." Again, the Vamana Purana declares: "Those, who are devoted to Vishnu or whom Vishnu loves, intensely perceive Him as the only goal and are not subject to further births". (Thus sumyoga has been explained.)

(2) Next as to rupa. The form is described as The Lotus eyed" in both the places where bhakti and upisana are mentioned.

(3) Next chodana (injunction or mandate). In some places, the word *upāsva* (meditate) is used as a word of injunc tion, and in other places, the word *bhajas va* (practise devotion); both denote the same thing i.e., a kind of service. Indeed, in the dictionary (nighantu) service, bhakti and upüsti are treated as synonyms. Both in the Linga and Markandeya Puranas it is said: "The root bhaj is explained in the sense of seva (service). Hence, the wise use the word bhakti to mean great service".

Therefore, the idea underlying the use of the word upāsana to mean bhakti is analysed thus:\-It is of the form of limitless love and devotion towards the worshipped God on

*22*   
INTRODUCTION

account of His faultless qualities. And it contains in itself the sense of belonging Him. It is this intense devotion that is referred to by the Lord in the Gita: "I am the closest to and most beloved of the jñānin" (VII. 17); "With love towards those who are devoted (to Me)" (X. 10); and " They feel glad when they talk about Me and feel happy when they hear about Me" (X. 9).

In the Vishnu Purana, again, occur the two passages: "However many thousands my births be, may I be devoted to Thee" (1-20-18); and also "My love to Thee is as great as the love for earthly enjoyment is to fools" (1-20-19). It is also said: "Being immersed in the bliss of remembering Him". There is the further passage: "Thrilled by the remembrance of His Name was the Daitya Chief (Prahlada)." In the *Vishnu* Tattva, it is said: "Service prompted by the impression of wis- dom on the mind is bhakti. When such service is being per- formed, love and affection do naturally spring up." Says the Barhaspatya Smriti also: "Whosoever is devoted to God and turns away from attachment to other things and has also renounced all desires (such as love of children, wealth and the world), he is fit to eat by begging (i. e., fit to become a sannyasin)". The Taittiriya śruti contains the invocation: "Let this God make us united with auspicious meditation". Thus are all the sayings about the injunction to do upasana depen- dent on love towards God.

(4) The word *anusamarana* (repeated recollection) used in several places denotes that thought becomes bhakti, The suffix unu shows not merely continuity, but also humility, that is, the knowledge that the devotee is the servant of the Lord. Hence, thought along with the consciousness of this rela- tionship is bhakti. In the Gita occur the words: "Remembering (anusmaran) Me continuously" (VII. 13) and "Thinking of (anucintayan)" (VIII. 8). Elsewhere it is stated: "Repeated re- collection of Krishna (anusmaraṇam) is supreme". Recitation of His Holy Names (Kirtana) and prostration are included in bhakti. For example, the Gita says: "The devotees perform worship by recitation and prostration" (IX. 14); as also "Keep Me in your mind (while doing all actions)" (IX. 34). This bhakti is called the Great Secret because it constitutes the essence of the purport of all the sastras. The Gita refers to it thus: "*To*

23

BHAGAVAD GUNA DARPANA

you, this most hidden secret" (IX. *1*); "Having known it, there is nothing further to know" (VII 2); and again, "This most hidden of all secrets" (XVIII. 64). More than enough has been said. This will do.

अनादिनिधनं विष्णुं सर्वलोकमहेश्वरम् ।

Sarayi egafard aâg:arfam wày || & || ब्रह्मण्यं सर्वधर्मशं लोकानां कीर्तिवर्धनम् । लोकनाथं महद्भूतं सर्वभूतभवोद्भवम् ॥ ७ ॥

(6) & (7) (And engaged in) praising Him, the Beginning- less and the Endless, the all\-pervading, the Ruler of all the worlds, the Supervisor of all the worlds. (Universal Witness), the One to be known from the Vedas, the Knower of all dharmas; the One who engages Himself in enhancing the fame of the worlds, Master of the worlds, the Great Person and the Cause of existence of all beings\-such a person (worshipper) is fteed from all griefs.

The words "tam eva cha" at the end of the fifth stanza is to be taken along with the next stanza. (Now the further commentary is about the 6 th or 7th stanza).

Then an observation is made as to the difficult nature of bhakti. This bhakti is grounded firm only by long continuous practice, and that too only after getting rid of all obstructions. This stage is gained only by those whose sins are cleared off by merits gained by performance of good and virtuous acts and conduct through many births. It is said (in the *Gita* and *Vishnu* Dharma respectively): "At the end of many births, one be- comes a Juanin (wise man) and attains Me. (VII. 19), and "In the course thousands of other births" (69)

Then what about persons who are unable to perform all the means enjoned by the sastras? In answer to such fears, he (Bhishma) points out an easy way in the stanzas 6 and 7 by answering the third question, "Praising whom".

To reach that Vishnu, who is object of bhakti and who is alone fit to be praised and worshipped in every way, Bhishma enumerates His qualities by ten adjectives, which begin with

24   
INTRODUCTION

"the beginingless and endless" and which distinguish Him from all minor gods whatsoever,

The beginningless and the *endless*:\- The Lord is ever ready to help, without being limited by time.

Vishnu \- Not limited by space: all\-pervasive.

Ruler of the worlds: \-He is possessed of mighty powers adequate to fulfil all and every kind of wishes on the part of His devotees.

Supervisor of the worlds: This quality is natural to Him. He never forgets but remembers (to fulfil the wishes of His devotees).

To be known from the Vedas (Brahmanyam) :\-All the Vedas in their branches extol Him, and so it is easy to know Him and praise Him.

Knower of all dharmas:\- Just, as He appreciates bhakti (taught by the *sastras*), He appreciates equally stava (praise).

Enhancing the fame of the world: "By praising Him the praiser become himself praised," says *the* Vishnu Dharma. Hence in respect of all psrs ons in all the worlds, who devote themselves to Him, He makes them also objects of praise by others.

Master of the worlds :\-Hence, He deserves all praise and service. In His essential nature He is united with supreme greatness indicative of sovereignty.

Great person (Mahatbhitam):\-He is worshipped easily. "The great are easily pleased with those who show by some act of theirs that they are desirous of obtaining favours from them." In the Udyoga parvan (of the Mahabharata), it is said: "The Lord does not expect anything other than a jar of water (offered by way of respect), washing the feet and kind enquiries about welfare".

The cause of all beings and their existence: He is the cause of existence and life to those who lack them. Hence, inevitably and necessarily, He shows His grace to them.

25   
BHAGAVD CUNA DARPANÁ

Praising (Stuvan) Any praise in some way or other will do, it need not be the same as or as perfect as bhakti\-yoga.

Be freed from all griefs: The devotee reaches the cool. lake of unsurpassed bliss which is the Lord, after crossing the forest\-fire of the threefold torments of samsara. In this con- text, it is proper that the word stuvan in stanza 6 should be interpreted to denote a very easy way of pleasing Him. The word stuvan, used earlier in the previous stanza, as it is combined with dhyāyan, denotes a more difficult means of attaining Him (because dhyana etc., are not easy of perform- ance). If not so 'understood, there will result the fault of repetition.

Besides, among the questions propounded, there is a separate question "stuvantaḥ kam" (Praising whom). Hence this answer, contained in stanzas 6 and 7, must be taken to answer that distinct question separately. Again there is the fact that other sustras also support this view.

Now, Bhishma proceeds to resolve the doubt raised by the 5th question.

qo à aquafai unisfumant xa: 1

यद्भक्त्या पुण्डरीकाक्षं स्तवैरर्चेन्नरः सदा ॥ ८ ॥

(8) This worship of the Lotus\-eyed at all times by praises by a person with devotion is hence regarded by me as the greatest of all dharmas.

This: what as been explained earliar as the difficult path and the easy according to the fitness of those resorting to them i.e., worship (archana) and hymanal praises (*stava)*

Of all dharmas, etc: Dharmas are divided into four classes. (i) Dharma performed for material benefits, such as increase of wealth (literally of cattle) and for the begetting of children. (ii) Dharma performed for obtaining celestial plea- sures, such as Svarga (the celestial world of the gods). (iii) Dharma for the attainment of moksha, which starts with the performance, by persons with no attachment and with the sole consciousness of worshipping Him, of sacrifices, the building of temples, etc., and which finds its completion in

*26*   
INTRODUCTION

knowledge of the Truth. (iv) Services done for His benefit only, such as thinking of Him with love and affection, praising Him and bowing before Him. The fourth is the best of all.

With Devotion: Worship with love is the best. Anything done with love is done easily and with no effort. It has been sung in the Git: (It) is very easy to do" (IX\-2). For, to remember a loving husband is always a pleasant thing to do.

This is different from the acts of worship of other gods who are not our true Lord,—a worship which is undertaken reluctantly like the drinking of a bitter medicinal decoction, with a view to obtain some benefit.

The Lotus\-*eyed*: This describes the fascinating beauty of the object of worship\-one far removed from other objects. which are worshipped by some and which are ugly and terrible to look at.

By Praises: Praising is easy, because only speech is necessary, not like sacrifices such as the visvajit or penances like the chandrayana which involve expenditure and much personal exertion. Hence, the venerabie Vyasa says: "Those distressed, afflicted or enfeebled, and those under fear or suffering from terrible diseases\-all these, by mere uttering of the word 'Nārāyaṇa' are relieved of grief and become happy." In the Vishnu Purana*,* it is said: "If one utters the Name even unconsciously...."

So also in the Vishnu Dharma: "Conscious or uncon. scious, if a man utters the (holy; Name of Vasudeva, all that (i. e., every sin commited wittingly or unwittingly) becomes dissolved like salt in water". Again, in the same work: "Water is sufficient to put out fire; sunrise dispels darkness; (so also) recitation of the holy Name of Hari extinguishes a multitude of sins." So also *the* passages (in the same work): "By recita- tion of His Name, a person is saved"; "By recitation of His Name, a person is released from great fear"; "One who utters once the two syllables of the name of 'Hari' has (thereby) packed his luggage to go to moksha"; "A person who remem- bers His Name, after his death, attains the highest world of Vishnu, whence there is no return to this world"; "The uttera nce of the names, 'Achyuta', 'Ananta' and 'Govinda', acts

27   
of

B.4   
BHAGAVAD GUNA DARPANA

às a sure medicine to cure all diseases. This is true, this *is* true, I say".

Elsewhere also: "Utter the name of Jagannatha or recite the Vedas. (They are equally efficacious)." In the Vishnu Sikta: "Those who understand the holy Names as being the most distinguished and utter them, become fixed Vaikunta), without return to this world".   
(in

Worship: This indicates that this dharma is of the form of serving a particular soul and that it is not very much be- yond direct experience. In the Gitā (IX.2), it is said: "It (bhakti) is capable of being experienced directly". That penance and pilgrimage are pleasing to God is known only from faith in śāstras (and is not directly seen); but, in the case of the stotra (or praise) we see from direct experience that it ought to be pleasing.

Person: This kind of worship by praise is open to almost all sentient beings as far as possible. The use of the singular number is significant, as 'praising (can be done) by any person by himself without seeking the help of others, and therefore it is unlike the great sacrifices which require the services of a number of persons. Even a person of bad character or con- duct or of lowly birth may, without fear, approach God, solely by reason of the great virtue of a taste for devotion. Very soon, thereafter, he becomes purified of all taste for sin as if by a bath in the Ganges, and becomes an extremely virtuous man. So it is said in the Gitā. Speaking of character, the Lord said: "I am equally well disposed to all beings" (IX.29). About conduct, the Lord said: "Even if he is a man of very bad conduct......" (IX.30). And about birth He said: "Even persons born from sinful wombs, if they will resort to Me, O Pärtha......" (IX. 32).

What does the above mean? Is it that even bad conduct is recognised as dharma? No, bad conduct is condemned every- where. For instance: "A person who does not keep away from bad conduct, or one with senses uncontrolled or one with no peace of mind cannot (attain the Atman by knowledge)" (Kath. *Up*., I. 11\. 23). Again, "O king*\!* Kesava is not to be obtained by those who have not conquered their senses." By these and other sayings, bad conduct is condemned as not being

*28*   
INTRODUCTION

liked by the Lord: hence, it is adharma (sinful). (Even with reference to the passage quoted above from the Gita), this point is made clear by the words next following: "He at once becomes a man of virtuous conduct." (IX. 31)

Again, bhakti is open to all, whether the person is in one or other asrama or is in no asrama at all, like a widower or snātaka (a person who has completed his studies as a brahma. charin and has not yet married and become a grihastha ) So the Brahma Sutras determine in the following and other aphor- isms: "He (the householder) must have control of the senses and *the* mind" (III. IV. 27); and ("Knowledge of God can be attained) in the case of those outside (the uśramas), as this is observed." (III. 4\. 36). This is but proper. There is no prohibition of the recitation of the holy Names by any person, whatever his position, as in the case of a son calling for his mother. For God is loving like a mother. He is the kipsman of all and a natural friend. See, for example, Gajendra, Jaṭāyus, the crow (the son of Indra), Vibhishana (brother of Ravana), the people of Kosala, the gopikas and the flower\-maker.

Then the question arises: What about the Apasūdra Adhi- *karana*? What is stated there is something different. This is an adhikarana in the Brahma *Sutras*, in which it is concluded that the Śūdras are prohibited from studying the Vedas. What is prohibited to others than the three higher is only the cere- monies connected with fire which they have not learnt, and the supreme science (of God) to be known through the Vedanta, as they have not studied the Vedas under an instruc tor and obtained the necessary qualification by studying the Upanishads under a guru. (Then, the commentator goes on to describe the exact position laid down in the Apasidra Adhi- karana, as to the competency of persons to approach God and the ways of doing so.) This kind of regulation (of approach. ing God through the path enjoined in the Vedas) holds good in the case of persons, desirous of moksha and belonging to the three (higher) castes. On account of the preponderance of their sattvaguna, they can proceed along the great path of Brahma\-vidya as laid down in the Upanishads and involving sravana (hearing about God), manana (thinking about Him), This is fairly well known. Even among them (the three   
etc.

29 .   
BHAGAVAD GUNA DARPANA

tad taarai a yarai utsauu: fqar || 20 ||

(10) (b) The God of gods and the indestructible Father

of beings.

He alone is the principal, who is the Great God of all the gods, i.e., of Siva, Brahma and others. Why? Because He is the Father of them all, *the* beings, that is, those who are existent. The word, 'Indestructible' is to show that He is not like ordinary fathers.

When He is their ancient and imperishable Father, they cannot be said to be without a protector at any time.

How He is the father, is explained in the next stanza:

ga: aaffo Haifa wazaifągunà | यस्मिंश्च प्रलयं यान्ति पुनरेव युगक्षये ॥ ११ ॥

(11) From whom all beings originate in the beginning of the first yuga and into whom they get dissolved again at the expiry of the yuga.

From whom (yataḥ) denotes the nimitta karana, the instrumental cause. · All' (sarvāņi) :\- Beginning with Brahma (the four\-faced) down to the stump of a tree.

Beginning of the first *yuga* (Ãdiyugagame) is significant to show that in the beginning it was different from what prevailed after the creation of Brahma, when through him further creation proceeded. (That is, the Lord Himself directly was responsible for creation at the beginning.)

Now about the Lord being the material cause: "Into whom alone all beings are dissolved" shows that the absorption is in the material cause of the effect. This is like the spider which absorbs its threads in its own saliva.

The word cha *(*and) is used to denote (i) that He is also the auxiliary cause and (ii) that He is the cause for maintain- .ing the universe, activating it, etc. The Lord who is the Supreme Principle is defined as possessing this quality in the   
· Vedas. For example: "From whom all these beings are born (Tatti. Up. III). It is also stated in an aphorism in the

40   
INTRODUCTION

Brahma Sutras:" From whom are the birth, etc., of this (universe)" (1.1.2)

That Brahman itself is all the three kinds of causes is illustrated from a Vedic text, "The Brahman is the forest. He is the tree" and established in the context of the Brahma- *Sutras* (1\. 4-23.): "(The Brahman is) also the material cause. because there can be no contradiction of the proposition and its illustrative examples." (To the question, "Which is the tree from which the whole universe is shaped ?", the answer given is: The tree, the forest and the Director are the same Brahman.")

Some distribute the causes between two agencies. The Lord is the material cause, and Maheśvara is the instrumental cause. Their stand is not *Vedic*. A question may be raised to the effect that if the Brahman is the material cause, that will be attributing to it imperfections like the quality of changing. There is no ground for such a question, for evolutionary and other changes are only in respect of prakriti (matter) and other things (souls) which constitute His own body. The example of the spider was cited by the respected Vedas only to meet this point.

Then, when the question by Yudhishthira was,   
"Who is the Supreme Deity?", the answer must naturally be "Vishnu". Instead of laying down a conclusion, Bhishma starts by saying yaḥ (he who), (as if this is something already known to the questioner). This is to show that it is well known from the sustras that Vishnu is the Supreme Deity of all deities.

(   
Besides, in the Upanishads etc., the Supreme Being is described in various places, i.e., when they direct themselves solely to speak of His characteristics, His Reality, worship of Him with contemplation, attaining Him, etc., sometimes with no adjectival qualifications and at other times with qualifica- tions like supreme' and in words that may be applied in common to all sorts of persons, such as Sat, Asat, Brahman, Akshara, etc., so that doubts arise as to whether the reference is to Brahmä (the four\-faced) or to Hari or to Siva, etc. set at rest these doubts, there occur passages like "Nārāyaṇa is the Supreme Brahman", "Nārāyaṇa is the Supreme Reality"

*41*   
Το

BHAGAVAD GUNA DARPANA

""   
(Nārāyaṇa Sukta); "That supreme abode of Vishņu (Katha. Up., III. 9); "Nothing else is higher than He (Vishnu) (Svet. Up., III. 9); and "Nothing is higher than Purusha (the Supreme Person)" (Kath. Up. III. 11). In the Gită also there are similar passages: "Nothing else is higher than I" (VII. 7); and "The Highest Person is another" (XV. 17). All these proclaim this fact in express words with no room for any other inference or doubt.

Any intelligent person can easily come to the conclusion. that Vishnu is the Highest Deity of unassailable rulership and that the others are not so high from the following also: (1) the common trend of the scriptural statements about creation; (2) the purport or meaning of the Purusha Sukta, Uttara Nārāyaṇa Sikta and other important passages; (3) the loud proclamations of many Upanishads like the Subala, Maitrayaniya, Mahopanishad, Chhandogya, Taittiriya, Katha and Aitareya; (4) the sattvika puranas and itihasas; (5) the opinions of great sages like Parasara, Vyasa and Valmiki who know and have had direct perception of the Highest Deity; (6) the agamas which are in conformity with the Vedas and (7) the natural excellence of His form, weapons, conveyances and action. Again, our acharyas have come to the above conclusion, as stated by them in the 'Dahara, 'Vaiśvānara' and other sections of the first chapter (Samanvayı Adhyāya) of the Brahma\-sutras. Hence there is no need to elaborate further.

Yamunacharya also says the same thing in a brief way in the 15th stanza of the Stotra *ratna*, which begins with "Thee, by reason of Thy grace, beauty and deeds." My (the commen- tator's) revered father also says, addressing Vishnu in the Vaikunta Stava (17): "We feel convinced that Thou art *the* Highest God from hundreds of passages in the Vedas which deal with the Highest Reality, from logical inferences, from Smritis of a like import, from sättvika purānas and from the opinions expressed by those who have attained the knowledge. of God". Again: "Learned men have also determined that Thou art the Supreme Lord from the beauty of Thy form. Thy superb radiance, some of Thy wonderful and appropriate exploits and some other clear and significant signs.” *(*Ibid. 28).

43   
INTRODUCTION

Thus, the tattva (the Ultimate Reality) and the hita (the beneficial way of attainment) have been determined as superior to all else. Of these, a method common and bene- ficial to all is to be clearly set forth. So Bhishma invites Yudhishthira to listen*:*

तस्य लोकप्रधानस्य जगन्नाथस्य भूपते । विष्णोर्नामसहस्रं मे शृणु पापभयापहम् ॥ १२ ॥

12\. O King\! Hear from me the Thousand Names which remove sins and drive away fear,\- of that Vishņu, Lord of the universe and Ruler of the world.

Of that (Tasya): Of Him whose supreme greatness has been set forth above.

Lord of the universe (Lokapradhanasya): The Lord on whom all without exception depend.

Ruler of the world: He rules all.

Thousand Names: Though there are so many other methods of pleasing Him, the Thousand Names are to be preferred which remove sins, etc. The Thousand Names deserve the praise that they destroy sins and drive away all sorts of fears by the very roots. From me (Me): From me or for my sake. (The Sanskrit word *me* is common to several cases, dative, ablative and genitive. Here it can be taken as either dative or ablative singular.) O King\! Hear: Why this call to listen to one who is already listening of his own accord, and why the vocative 'O King'? These show that the speaker (Bhishma) felt that the gain of a listener for this matter was worthy of commendation.

(Then he proceeds to set out what he will be speaking about.)

arfa arorfa Ħorfa fazurarfa \#gınA: | ऋषिभिः परिगीतानि तानि वक्ष्यामि भूतये ॥ १३ ॥

(13) For the good (of the world), I shall tell you the (holy) Names of the Supreme Soul (Paramatman) which are indicative of His attributes and glory, well known and sung by the rishis.

*43*

B.6   
BHAGAVAD GUNA DARPANA

Indicative of attributes (Gauṇāni): Generally, words are capable of four functions: to indicate (1\) an individual, (2) a class, (3) a quality and (4) an action. (For example, Chaitra, a Brahmin, pure and doing charity.) The occasion for denoting an individual and a class arises respectively through. the limitation of individuality and the presence of universality. And these are not relevant here. So, the word "*Gauṇāni*” is used here, to show that the names (of God) are derived from qualities and actions which have become the cause therefor. Their significance is derivative and etymological. Here the word "guna*"* must be taken to include activities also. In the Mahabharata, the Lord speaks of the etymological interpreta- tions of His Names as referring to qualities and actions. He says: "Some of My Names are said to indicate qualities"; "He who knows the meaning of Names indicating action, O\! son; and "Hear attentively from Me, O sinless one, the derivation of My Names which are applied to Me on account of My action". These Names are not without significance, because in each word each of its parts, when analysed, bears a significant sense. The Names are not used, according to some capricious convention.

*Well* known: These names are being used largely both in *they* Vedas and in ordinary literature, hence they are well known as applicable to Him. They are ruhani, traditionally well known. Even though some of the names may apply to others in an etymological sense, yet they are peculiarly His own. For a name to be a name must apply only to one.

By rishis: like Sanaka, Sanatkumāra and Narada who have understood the essense of all the Vedas. Sung: sung on all sides (pari). These Names were applied as descriptive of Him, by them who explained the forms and reasons with an affection which is like that of a cow with a full udder towards its calf. They are culled from the sayings of various rishis, like honey gathered from various flowers by a bee, and strung together by Vyasa in the form of a stotra. They have come down traditionally.

For the good of All: Bhiti means existence, life. The meaning here is that this teaching is for the saving and reviving of the soul which has been lost in beginningless

*44*   
INTRODUCTION

samsara*.* For, the Taittiriya Upanishad thus describes the existence (sat*)* and non\-existence (asat) of the individual soul: "He who knows the Brahman as non\-existent, himself becomes non\-existent. Whoever knows the Brahman as existent is indeed truly existent." (II. vi. 1)

Of the great soul: Great is His glory and His knowledge. deep and immeasurable. Hence it is impossible give out all the Names of His. So it is said: "I have listened to the auspicious interpretation of the names of this God. From it I know only this, that Kesava indeed cannot be known fully." Those who wish to experience in this manner the Thousand Names of Vishnu, will help in the realisation of their souls. This is the meaning suggested by the word Mahātmānaḥ.

The persons above\-mentioned who are competent to utter these (Names of His) should not, as these Names are due to the gunas, mix with persons who are thieves of the *gunas* (i. e., those who deny these gunas to Vishnu or those who ascribe them to other deities). Suppose you argue: "Let this teaching about the Brahman with attributes be for persons who are entitled to a lesser objective (than final salvation); for the teaching about the Brahman without attributes is indeed only for those who aspire for salvation." Fie unto you, your ears are indeed deaf\! For you dont hear to what these Names form the means\-which is loudly proclaimed in this verv stotra at the end (where the fruits of reciting it are mentioned): "He is released from the bonds of samsara ", and "He reaches the Eternal Brahman". If once you postulate two Brahmans, one with attributes and one without attributes, the oneness of the Brahman (which you advocate) will be destroyed. If in a context when, with a view to know the best means of salvation according to the very essence of the śāstras, the question is put, "What is it you consider as the best *dharma*", and the answer is in the same words, "This is *the* best in my considered opinion", if you say that even then the lesser is mentioned, where else will there be an opportunity to teach the highest? (That is to say, the question and answer denote that what is taught is the highest and nothing less than the highest truth). Do not argue like a garrulous person that of the two, that is, of the worship of God with attributes and of God without attributes, the former is a step towards the

*45*   
BHAGAVAD GUNA DARPANA

latter. For, the two are contradictory to each other so that one cannot be a step to lead to the other.

Besides, what is the fundamental reason for one without attributes being experienced as if it is with attributes? If it is said to be due to *avidya* (nescience), then what a fascinating mystery about the Vedas (do we have)\! How can the Brahman, which is said to be the best medicine to one who is about to die, having swooned from the poison of birth, death, delusion and other imperfections of life in samsara, be at the same time the abode of faults like nescience and delusion and remain without even a trace of the smallest particle of (good) qualities?

If it is argued that the fault of the Brahman is itself unreal, your argument about the attributelessness (of the *Brahman*) is also unreal. Is this quality real or unreal? If the fault is unreal, then it means that the Brahman is (nairguṇyam) without a fault. Similarly, if being devoid of attributes is unreal, then being endowed with attributes is real. Thus, the proposition is proved. So, even though you do not want it, the truth is that the Brahman is free of faults and full of attributes.

There is another point to be answered. What is it that destroys the nescience in the Brahman? If the answer is, "He who realises monism or oneness", then we have a beautiful (riddle). The Supreme Brahman wanders round and round in error, while the bound individual soul in samsara redeems it. (This is stating the proposition upside down.)

Why   
Moreover, on what ground can the passages describing the Brahman as having attributes be said to be useless? If the answer is that these are contradicted by passages describing the Brahman as without attributes, why not the other way round? Both kinds of passages are equally authoritative and exercise equal force in contradicting (each other).

reject *the* one and favour the other? There is another point. If the attributes of the Brahman are to be denied, what is the purpose of these poor Vedic texts describing the Brahman as having attributes? If the reply is that there is necessity to mention the existence of attributes for the purpose of negat. ing them, why mention them at all and then negate them? Is

46   
INTRODUCTION

it written on its pate that the sastras should speak about an unnecessary thing and then say it is unnecessary? As the Mahābārata puts it: "Why touch the mud and clean it? Better keep away from and not touch mud at all.

If it is argued that the rule in Mimämsä, (VI. 5\. 19) that the later passages are more potent and kill the earlier ones is to be applied here, no\! The rule is not of universal application. Besides, the earlier knowledge that a thing exists here cannot be stultified by the later statement that it is not.

"   
(Note. The rule is exemplified in the following case. In the Pratassavana sacrifice, there are five priests who officiate, the "Adhvaryu", "Prastotṛi", "Pratihartṛi",“ Udgătṛi' and 'Brahma'. When starting a prayer they move one behind another, each taking hold of the girdle of the priest immediately before him. The sacrificer in turn has to take hold similarly of the 'Brahma' priest. It is laid down that if the Udgatri' accidentally lets go his hold, the sacrifice. should be finished without distributing dakshina to the priests. It has to be started afresh and the *dakshina* prescribed in that case is that already prescribed. But if the 'Partihartri' lets go his hold, the dakshina prescribed is the whole wealth of the sacrificer. What is to happen, if both the 'Prastotri' and 'Udgātṛi' should lose hold, one soon after another? The rule is that the penalty prescribed in the later case is to prevail. Here, the penalties prescribed are opposed to each other and cannot be reconciled, and hence the rule.)

When there is a breaking (of the chain of priests) round the sacrificial fire, and this rule becomes relevant, the weakness of the earlier injunction is due to the fact that the later injunction cannot arise without wiping away the earlier one. Here (such a later statement) is said to arise. How to apply the rule here? The mention of the *gunas* and the denial of the *gunas* are not opposed to each other. Each may exist with- out contradicting the other. It may be argued that the passages denying attributes (to God) conceal (or obliterate) that part (of the scriptures) which affirms qualities, on account of the former passages being later. In that case, even the portion (of the Vedas) dealing with the nature of the Brahman may be stultified by the statement, 'The (ultimate)

47   
BHAGAVAD GUNA DARPANA

Reality is the void". For this statement is later. If it is replied that this arises from the delusion of Buddhists and cannot affect anything established by the *Vedas*, the reply is not acceptable. For, according to you, the *Veda* itself ariees from the delusion of the Brahman. And what distinction can be made between these two delusions?

Moreover, if looked into carefully, the scriptural passages affirming qualities (in God) should be regarded as later. Passages like "He is sinless, free from old age...... (Chh. Up. VII.1.4) prove that the mandatory declarations (of the *Vedas*) regarding the presence of auspicious qualities (in God) are later, being preceded by the negation of evil qualities (in Him) by passages which deny attributes (to Him) and mean only that He is free from all impurities of the soul and the body.

It is also argued that the defence of the (co\-existence) of passages affirming and denying attributes (to God) lies in their being distinguished as false, and true (respectively). Even this is misleading talk. For there is stultification of the authority (of the Vedas as a source of knowledge), when it deals with false matters, as when there is false perception of silver (in lead or mother\-of\-the pearl) perception loses its authority (as a source of knowledge). If it is your opinion that passages in the Vedas affirming attributes to God are to be ignored as false, why not ignore as false the passages denying attributes? Enough of this useless talk.

What then is the true position? The Vedic texts ascribing knowledge, power, etc., to the Brahman mean that it is possessed of all beneficent and good qualities; and the texts that deny attributes mean only that it is devoid of bad qualities such as attachment, hate, etc.

Passages like "His wishes are true, His resolves are fulfilled" (Chh. Up. VIII. i. 5) illustrate auspicious quali- ties. While the denial in general terms of attributes can get its full meaning by confining it to another subject (namely, evil qualities), there is no necessity to say that the Brahman is not possessed of good qualities. This rule (that the general yields

*48*

INTRODUCTION

to the special) is to be found fully authoritative in Pada- havaniya, Brāhmaṇa Parivrajaka', 'Brāhmaṇa Koundinya', 'Gobalivarda' and similar maxims.

Note. Padahavaniya.\-In the horse\-sacrifice some homas are prescribed to be performed at the hoof marks of the horse. Generally the homa is to be made only in a fire. The special mention of hoof marks overrides the general rule about making oblations only in ftre. Brahmana Parivrājaka: The term 'Brahmana' is general, while parivrājaka (an ascetic) is special. Brahana Koundinya: Again, Brāhmaṇa' is general, while Koundinya' is special as referring to one belonging to the Koundinya gotra. Go\-balivarda: 'Go' (cattle) is general, balivrada (bull) is special.

The words of negation should be taken to refer especially to bad qualities and to throw them out by the neck as being not found in the Brahman, and the words laying down positive attributes at the same time speak equally explicitly of the existence of good qualities in the Brahman. In the same

((   
sentence, we find used with respect to the Brahman words like He is sinless" at the beginning, and "His wishes are true, His resolves are fulfilled" (Chh. Up. VIII. 1\. 5) at the end. Again, another text begins with the statement, "That which is invisible," and ends: "That which the wise see as the source of all beings, is eternal, all\-pervading, existing every- where, very subtle and imperishable" (*Mund*. Up. 1.1.6). Why then trouble about nyayas (analogies, maxims or argu- ments)? It is as plain as pikestaff, as when a man says "There is a pillar" and another says There is no pot." (Neither contradicts the other). The author of the Vedanta Sutras details (in regard to God) the denial of visibility and such other qualities and the existence of auspicious qualities opposite thereto in the aphorism: "That which is described as unseeable etc. (is the Paramatman), as qualities (peculiar to Him) are mentioned". (1.2.22). In the third quarter of this chapter (of the *Vedanta* Sutras), known as the 'collection of all qualities', Vyasa proves about qualities to be known from vidyas like those of Sandilya, Upakosala, Dahara, Paryanka, etc., that all these qualities are not merely to be known in essence by the mind (but have to be meditated upon). So he says: "There should be no omission (of

*49* \*\*HAGAVAD GUNa darpana

meditating on these qualities) because of the ardour (shown by the Vedas towards them)". (III.iii. 39).

The venerable Parāśara says clearly: "Sattva and other qulities of matter do not exist in the Lord" (Vishnu Purāņa, 1\. 9\. 44); and also "He is possessed of all auspicious qualities" (Ibid, VI. 5\. 54). And he proves this proposition: "The Supreme is perfect and full of beneficent qualities which are not opposed to *the* delusion caused by words denoting the negation. of imperfections. So the sastras proclaim".

(The following passages bear this out) "All good quali ties inhere in Him". (Chh. Up. IV. xv. 2); "He is the con- troller of all, the ruler of all". *(Brih*. Up. VI. iv. 22); "He who understands all and knows all" *(Mund*. Up. I. i. 10), "The Vedas say His mighty power is natural to Him, is of various kinds, and consists of knowledge, strength and activities. (Svet. Up. VI. 2); "Nārāyaṇa is the father, mother, brother, the home, the refuge, the good\-hearted friend and the ultimats goal." (Subāla Up. VI); "Creator of all actions, He is all sweet perfumes, He is all sweet tastes" (Chh. Up. III. xiv. 2). In the 'Anandavalli' (of the Taittiriya Upanishad), it is demonstrated that mind and speech return (without comprehending the extent) from His bliss, because of the unlimited extent of His knowledge, might, youth. The Vishnu Purāṇa, in the context of explaining the connotation of the word "Bhagavan" men- tions all His qualities in the passage beginning with "Pure and possessed of great glory" (VI. 5\. 72).

Bhishma says in the Sabha Parvan (of the *Mahābhārata)*: "I have been a disciple of many virtuous men, ripe in wisdom and have heard from them the much prized qualities of Śauri (Lord Krishna). Hence, I consider that Hari is the best. person above others to be worshipped because of these quali ties". Again, in Karna Parvan, he says: "The attributes and gunas of that great Victorious Person, the son of Vasudeva, distinguished by the discus and conch and mace in His hands, cannot be sufficiently extolled by all the worlds meeting to- gether and for tens of thousands of years". Also in the Varaha *Purāṇa*: "If there is a person blessed with the life\-length of Brahma (the four\-faced Creator) and endowed with a crore of tongues and a mind pure and clean, such a person may

50   
INTRODUCTION

perhaps be able to enumerate one ten\-thousandth part of Yout qualities, or may not. Best of the gods, be pleased with me. In the Matsya Purana: "Innumerable are the qualities of the Supreme Soul as are the gems hidden in the ocean". The *Vishnu* Dharma also says: "The qualities of the Supreme Soul who is devoid of qualities like sattva or *rajas* of Prakriti, cannot be told by all the groups of rishis". In conclusion, the Mahabharata and the *Rāmāyaṇa* contain many passages of a similar nature.

Those who (like Bhaskara) say that the Brahman Itself, becomes involved in samsara, conditioned by some limitation, as well as those who. (like Yadava prakāśa) say that the Brahman Itself becomes involved in *samsara* by evolution of Its essen- tial nature, have to admit that the *Brahman* is liable to all kinds of imperfections like being conditioned and being subject to changes. Hence, the names of the Lord like 'purity', 'auspiciousness', 'the highest', will get angry. i. *e*. will be inappropriate. Besides, others like Śri Sankara say from passages like "From Him speech and mind turn away unable to reach Him". (Taitt. Up. II. 9), that the Vedas and other authorities cannot adequately speak of the Brahman. This is not correct either. For, otherwise the Brahman will become tuchcha, an imaginary and non\-existent thing, like a mare's nest.

Moreover, in the very passage quoted, it is said, "The bliss of the Brahman" and "From whom words". There will be contradiction of the quality (of bliss) attributed (to the Brahman here). Again, if bliss is not a quality of the Brahman, one will naturally expect the Upanishad to say that the Brahman has no ananda (bliss); but it says that mind and speech turn away from His bliss. If the Brahman cannot be established by the *sastras*, all the sastras will become of no use. Even the study of the knowledge of the Brahman *(*Brahma. mimāmsa) which is begun with. "Then therefore the desire to know the Brahman" (Vedanta Sutras, I. i. 1) need not have been started at all. Such a theory will conflict with a number of other passages like "By all words, He is the person ultimately indicated"; and "A person not versed in the Vedas cannot think of Him, the Great". Again the Vedānta *Sūtras* (1\. 1\. 3\) say: "Because the sastras form the source of knowledge

*51*

B\-7   
BHAGAVAD GUNA DARPANA

(about God)." The Anandavalli section of the Taittiriya Upanishad starts with the words, "We will investigate into the measurement of bliss," and goes on multiplying the bliss a hundred fold at each stage and arrives towards the end at the bliss of Brahma (the four\-faced creator). From the very order in which the manifold nature of the bliss is mentioned, it is clear that what is aimed at is to describe a bliss, vast and immeasurable, and not to postulate that there is no quality like bliss at all. Hence, the author of the Vedanta Sutras say.: "(The relevant passage) negates the 'this\-muchness' of the description of the quality mentioned." (III. ii. 21). The principle enunciated there has to be applied here. Thus, my (Commentator's) revered father has said: "Starting as if to measure the qualities, bliss, etc., the Veda says that the speech and mind retreated, because there is no question of any limit to them (the qualities)". By this the passage "O Lord' No name, class, etc., and such imaginary things are to be found in Thee." also gets explained. Moreover, when there is a prohibition of the imaginary attribution of name, class to the Lord, it is thereby esta- blished that He has qualities which are not imaginary, but fundamentally real. Thus, you (the opponent) yourself supply the fetters to bind your feet. Even the invocation, "Oh Lord", shows that He has a name. Not only this, it shows that He can be within the reach of speech, even though He is beyond it (in another sense). The passage only means that He cannot be denoted by words expressive of limited things. But He is possessed of names and forms suitable to Him and different from those found in the universe. This is made clear else- where: "His names, forms and activities which constitute all the source of knowledge concerning Him, are not within the range of measurement. Such a Person, i. e., Vishnu has now come into your womb." (Vishņu *Purāna*, V. *2\.* 19).

Some say: In the use of these Names, there is no scope for analysing each word into its parts and finding the actual meaning as derived from the meanings of each part. The real object is not to teach us the qualities (That is to say, these names are used only as a help for the devotee to realise *the* Nirguna Brahman through the recitation of the qualities of the Saguna Brahman, a step towards such realisation).

52   
INTRODUCTION

This is an uncritical and highly exoggerated statement even on the surface. Because, these are words, significant and conveying definite ideas, which cannot be ignored, and there is no authority to ignore them. Besides, Bhishma himself describes these (holy) Names as gaunani (descriptive of His attributes). The Vishnu Sikta speaks of "Those who have understood the meaning of the Names after analysing them into their components". Thus, the object of using the Names is only to remind us of the very many attributes of the Lord.

It may well be that these Names remind us only of qualities known to us from other *sustras* as in the case of mantras. But that does not mean that the qualities denoted by the words are altogether non\-existent. (For example, mantras are uttered in praise of certain deities before under- taking any ritual, like a sacrifice. The deity concerned is already known by the mandatory injunctions in the Vedas, and the mantras help only to remind the devotee of the deity. On that reason, it cannot be argued that the mantra is not an authoritative source of knowledge.) Therefore, it is that in the introductory portion of this stotra as well as in its conclusion, Bhishma extols the gunas (including the actions) of the Lord; and the enumeration of the gunas by means of the Names in the body of the stotra is for making us remember them. The reason is that the uttering even one of the holy Names is potent to grant us all benefits. Such a name becomes equivalent. to mantras like the twelve\-syllabled (Om Namo Bhagavate Vāsu- *deviya*), or eight\-syllabled (*Om* Namo Nārāyaṇaya) or the six- syllabled (Om Namo Vishwave) and such like. A mantra may be made the principal and all the others subsidiary: it is so stated in the Bhagavata scriptures.

(And single Names by such relationship with potent mantras give us all benefits). As quoted from the Vishnu Sakta, "Namachit Vivaktana" the word used, is in singular; it bears out the above statement about the potency of single Name fully. In the chapters in the Mahabharata relating to the explanations of the meanings of the Names, it may be seen that, though it is true that Names pronounced merely and without knowledge of their meating help, still revelation of the qualities through explanation of the meanings (of the Names) quickly promotes clearness of mind and purifies.

*53*   
BHAGAVAD GUNA DARPANA

Thus: "Vyasa sitting with his disciples has praised Madhu- südana by singing His holy Names. Please be good enough, venerable Sir, to teach me the high significance of these Names. I am sincerely eager to hear. Hearing (the meaning of the Names) of Hari, the Lord even of the Creator, I shall become pure without any blemish like the autumn moon" Santi parvan, 342), and Dhritarashtra says: "O Sañjaya\! I ask of you, tell me about the Lotus\-eyed. I shall attain Him, dear boy, by knowing the meanings of His holy Names and His activities." (Udyoga*\-*parvan, 59).

The way to make use of the Names is to be in conformity. with the meaning of each Name. This can be learnt from the word and the passages contained in the explanatory chapters of *the* 'Udyoga', 'Mokshadharma" and "Vaishnava dharma" and also from the books that lay down the rules for performing *japa* in respect of each mantra.

\[The three stanzas that follow are not found in the Mahabharata. But generally, in the case of every mantra, mention must be made of its author (rishi), its metre (chhandas), its presiding deity (devata), the words which are said to be its seed (bijakshara), power (sakti) and the core or heart, and finally the gains to be derived, by reciting them. Following this rule, the succeeding stanzas mention the various angas (parts or elments) of the mantra of the Thousand Names.\]

xzfantai azaeu àzqurdì agıyfa: 1 छन्दोऽनुष्टुप् तथा देवो भगवान् देवकीसुतः ॥ १४ ॥ अमृतांशूद्भवो बीजं शक्तिर्देवकिनन्दनः ।   
faarar gzd az arað fafagerà || 24 ||

(14) (15) "The great Vedavyäsa is the rishi of these Thousaud Names of Vishnu; 'Anushṭup' is its metre. The presiding Deity is the Lord Krishna, Devaki's son. The seed is (the two Names), "The source of the moon" and "the sun". Its power is the Name, "The son of Devaki". The heart is the Name "One who is sung by three important Sāma hymns". The purpose is the gain of peace.

*54*   
TRODUCTION

विष्णुं जिष्णुं महाविष्णुं प्रभविष्णुं महेश्वरम् । अनेकरूपदैत्यान्तं नमामि पुरुषोत्तमम् ॥ १६ ॥

( 16 ) I bow to Vishnu, the Victorious, the All pervading   
the Mighty, the Lord of All, the Enemy of Daityas, ( demons) of many forms and the Best of persons.

; ;   
\---   
अस्य श्रीविष्णोर्दिव्यसहस्रनामस्तोत्रमहामन्त्रस्य \- श्रीवेद- व्यासो भगवानृषिः । अनुष्टुप् छन्दः श्रीमहाविष्णुः परमात्मा श्रीमन्नारायणो देवता; अमृतांशूद्भवो भानुरिति बीजम् देवकी नन्दनः स्रष्टेति शक्तिः; उद्भवः क्षोभणो देव इति परमो मन्त्रः ; शङ्खभृन्नन्दकी चक्रीति कीलकम् शार्ङ्गधन्वा गदाधर इत्यस्त्रम् ; रथाङ्गपाणिरक्षोभ्य इति नेत्रम् ; त्रिसामा सामगः सामेति कव- चम् आनन्दं परब्रह्मेति योनिः ऋतुः सुदर्शनः काल इति दिग्बन्धः; श्रीविश्वरूप इति ध्यानम् ; श्रीमहाविष्णुप्रीत्यर्थे श्रीसहस्रनामजपे विनियोगः ;   
;   
;

;

(The above angas are usually, repeated in prose in the course of *pārāyana*. They are followed by some dhyāna\-ślokas or stanzas for meditation. It is thereafter that the holy Names are recitcd).

Of this grand mantra, i. e., the Thousand Names of Vishnu, the venerable Veda Vyasa is the rishi, the metre is anushțup; its Deity is Sriman Nārāyaṇa, the Supreme Soul, the All pervader. Its seed is "Amritamśūdhbhavo Bhanu". Its power is 'Devakinandana'. The essential part of the mantra is Ußbhavah: Kshobhano Deval". Its pin is "Sankabhrin Nandaki Chakri". Its weapon is sārigadhanvā Gadadharah." Its eye is "Rathatigapanih: Akshobhyah.” Its armour is "Trisāma sāmagas sāma". Its womb is "Anandam Para Brahma". The enclosure binding the directions (east, west, south and north) is "Ritussudarsanahkala". The contemplation is on the universal form. Its purpose and utility is in the Thousand Names being used for praising and pleasing Vishnu.

ध्यानम्

क्षीरोदन्वत्प्रदेशे शुचिमणिविलसत् सैकते मौक्तिकानां   
मालाक्लृप्तासनस्थः स्फटिकमणिनिभैर्मोौकिकैर्मण्डिताङ्गः ।

55

BHAGAVAD GUNA DARPANA

शुभ्रैरभैर दरुप रिविरचितैर्मुक्तपीयूषवर्षे   
रानन्दी नः पुनीयादरिनळिनगदाशङ्खपाणिर्मुकुन्दः ॥ १७ ॥

*Dhyana* Ślokas

(17) May Mukunda, with the discus, mace, conch and lotus in His hands, purify us\-Mukunda who is seated on a seat of garlands of pearls, in the region of the milky ocean with the sand shining by the light from pure gems; who is adorned by pearls transparent like crystals; and who is enjoying ecstatic bliss on account of pure white clouds overhead, raining showers of nectar.

(The following describes contemplation on the universal form).

भूः पादौ यस्य नाभिर्वियदसुरनिलश्चन्द्रसूर्यौ च नेत्रे   
कर्णावाशाः शिरो द्यौर्मुखमपि दहनो यस्य वास्तेयमन्धिः अन्तस्स्थं यस्य विश्वं सुरनरखगगोभोगिगन्धर्वदैत्यै-

श्वित्रं रंरम्यते तं विभुवनवपुषं विष्णुमीशं नमामि ॥ १८ ॥

(18) I bow to Lord Vishnu who has the three worlds as His body. His feet are the earth, His navel is the sky. His breath is the wind. His eyes are the sun and the moon. The directions are His ears. His head is paradise. Fire is His mouth. His kidneys are the ocean. Inside Him is found the universe with its variegated kinds of gods, men, birds, cattle, serpents, Gandharvas and demons sporting as they please.

शान्ताकारं भुजगशयनं पद्मनाभं सुरेशं   
विश्वाकारं गगनसदृशं मेघवर्ण शुभाङ्गम् ।

लक्ष्मीकान्तं कमलनयनं योगिद्ध्यानगम्यं

वन्दे विष्णुं भवभयहरं सर्वलोकैकनाथम् ॥ १९ ॥

(19) My salutation to Vishnu, the embodiment of peace and resting on the serpent (Adisesha). From his navel sprouts a lotus. He is the Lord of the celestial gods. His form is the universe. He is like the sky and of the colour of the clouds and of auspicious limbs, He is the Lord of Sri. He has lotus\-like eyes. He is

56

INTRODUCTION

attainable by yogins in their hearts through contem plation. He is the destroyer of all the fears of samsara. He is the one Lord of the worlds.

\#azurṁ qaĦàgaĽÁ

श्रीवत्साङ्कं कौस्तुभोद्भासिताङ्गम् । पुण्योपेतं पुण्डरीकायताक्षं   
विष्णुं वन्दे सर्वलोकैकनाथम् ॥ २० ॥

(20) prostrate before Vishnu, *the* one Lord of the worlds, grey as the clouds and clothed in yellow robes. His chest is marked by the mole known as Srivatsa. His body is resplendent with the Kaustubha gem. He is surrounded by holy persons. And He has wide eyes like lotuses.

(Then follow the Nāmā\-slokas, the stanzas giving the Names.)

*57* 